From:	Camp, Ed
Sent:	Sunday, May 29, 2022 6:21 PM
To:	Pine, Bill
Subject:	panhandle ms skeleton
Attachments:	panhandle_oyster_trends - SPG review_evc.docx

Hi Bill,
I read and reviewed the panhandle ms you drafted. I agree with the results, the majority of the 
conclusions. I made comments in the attached but they got a little messy so I summarized them here in 
a way that I think I’d find useful. Of course that may not be useful to you, but that is how I did it. I’m 
happy to work on some of this if you’d like me to. Just let me know. 

Also, I really didn’t find it that upsetting. Sure there were a couple places that it sounded more 
judgmental than it probably needed to be, but I also think that stuff would get trimmed by editors 
anyway because most of it was a bit beyond the scope of the ms as laid out. I thought it was super 
helpful for “labeling” what has and has not occurred. If you wanted to, I think you could make more of 
the multi-project assessment type, especially in light of the NAS 2022 report that focuses so much on 
the larger, multi-project scale analyses. Like I think one of the things that it feels like maybe you pulled 
punches on was pointing out how the way these projects were designed, even just in terms of 
materials/densities/treatments (or lack of same!) really made it difficult to learn more about it. I think 
you made that point a bit about AB, but it’s a bit glaring at the multiple project level too. Like, in the 
takeaways, I think it could be pointed out that a lot of the characteristics of these projects that are 
preventing greater learning (insufficient experimental design, questionable actual 
construction/implementation, insufficient monitoring) are not rare or new—they’re pointed out over 
and over again in lit and reports. 

                1. Revise the methods section in a couple ways:
                                a. possibly include an “approach” subheading that makes clear you’re going to do be 
doing a couple different things, including
                                                i. Assessing trends over space and time by looking a relatively simple models 
to predict counts as a function of various interactions of bays and period. This would be done for three 
separate LHS variables—spat, seed, and legals
                                                ii. Assessing counts of at least spat as a function of discharge
                                                iii. Assessing counts of at least spat as a function of restoration type
                                                iv. Assessing material itself as function of time?
                                b. Include subheadings for each of the three model types, and follow them through 
the results
                                c. Re-organize current methods text in the above order
                                d. Add equations to each
                                e. Move up some of the material from the results to the methods.

                2. Organize results in those subheadings, cut some of the methods that will be moved.
                3. A couple changes to the discussion. I made comments, but overall my approach would be:
                                a. Mostly keep the first couple paragraph that highlight the decline & failure to 
recover, overall
                                b. Tweak or add a paragraph that highlights it’s really difficult to see any clear 
differences among the restoration types or, to a lesser extent, the bays
                                c. Make clear by adding in different topic sentences that the next 2-3 paragraph will be 
about potential explanations as to why this might have been, including:
                                                i. restoration/cultch material used may not have been good oyster 
settlement/recruitment/survival—note different types used and keep comparison to other restoration 
materials such as LCR (e.g., to note big differences in the material size)
                                                ii. restoration/clutching height could matter—bars are almost certainly 
“lower” (in terms of relief) than they’ve ever been before and so even if the densities per acre (which 
might approximate height) were similar, it might not yield the same vertical relief or height off the 
bottom
                                                iii. restoration/clutching implementation and monitoring may obscured 
assessment of response, even if it were done with appropriate material and appropriate height. I think 
you kind of have this here already but it felt fuzzy to me and I think it’s critical for the 
takeaway/conclusions to stand up.
                                d. in takeaways or conclusion, consider something that effectively communicates that 
with no clear positive response and small contrast due to process error (literally they put stuff down in a 
way that makes it hard to distinguish, i.e. is there really a different between 200 and 400 when blowing 
it off a barge?) observation error (monitoring may be insufficient or otherwise challenging), all we can 
really say is that whatever has been done, has not yielded the results desired. So we know things aren’t 
better, but we haven’t learned why because of some combination of sub-optimal design, 
implementation & monitoring, or a deeper ecological ‘hole’ (alt stable state) than was expected. 
                                e. Not sure if this is worth it or not, but I think it’s possible that you could point out 
that the way things unfolded are consistent with the idea that the decision-makers new the system well. 
The fact that most of the restoration types were (i) the same or similar types of material (ii) spread in 
mostly very similar densities/heights (iii) except for one did not include specific experimentation i.e. 
different treatments with good replication, all suggest decision-makers who were either negligent (we 
don’t have to say that) or were really confident that they already “knew the formula for success”. The 
latter seems especially believable given the long history of clutching in at least AB. But the fact that the 
restoration was not temporally staged/spaced out, and evaluated in real time (again, stuff right out of 
NAS 2022) meant that there was almost no chance the projects would learn from early mistakes. It also 
suggests it may be necessary, especially when dealing with things known to have alt stable states like 
oysters and pretty much every habitat forming organisms, to avoid making decisions as if we know 
where the system state is. 

Ed

Edward Camp
he/him
Assistant Professor of Fisheries and Aquaculture Governance
Fisheries and Aquatic Science Program
School of Forest, Fisheries, and Geomatic Sciences
Extension Specialist Florida Sea Grant
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL USA 32606
(352) 273 3652

